Ch1 revision (#143)
UBC-DSCI/introduction-to-datascience: 02-wrangling.Rmd

## Overview 

> This chapter will be centred around tools for cleaning and wrangling data that move data from its raw format into a suitable format for data analysis. They will be presented in the context of a real-world data science application, providing more practice working through a whole case study.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This chapter will be centred around defining tidy data, 
a data format that is suitable analysis, 
and the tools needed to transform raw data into this format.
This will be presented in the context of a real-world data science application, 
providing more practice working through a whole case study.
```

## Chapter learning objectives
By the end of the chapter, students will be able to:

> * define the term "tidy data"

Reviewer: We should use `-` for this list as we do in earlier chapters . This inconsistency is probably my fault from a long time ago, sorry!

Author: no worries! Easy to fix!

* discuss the advantages and disadvantages of storing data in a tidy data format

> * contrast the basic data types and structures in R

Reviewer: We should be more specific here since we are really focusing on just vectors and data frames.
```suggestion
* define what vector and data frames are in R, and describe how they relate to each other
* describe the types of data that can be stored in integer, double, character, logical, and factor vectors in R
```

    - `group_by`
    - `map`

## Data frames and Vectors

> At this point, we know how to load data into R from various file formats. Once loaded into R, most of the tools we have learned about for reading data into R represent the data as a data frame. So now we will spend some time learning more about data frames in R so that we have a better understanding of how we can use and manipulate these objects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We now know how to load data into R from various file formats.
Given that most of the tools we have use to do this represent the data as a 
data frame in R, we will spend some time learning more about data frames
to deepen our understanding of them. This will be useful prerequisite knowledge
to use and manipulate these objects in our data analysis.
```

### What is a data frame?

> Let's first start by defining what a **data frame** is exactly. From a data perspective, it is a rectangle where the rows are the observations:

Reviewer: I think we want to prefix observations and variables with "statistical". The reason for this, is that if we leave it as variables, then computer science folks will think we mean variables in the programming sense. This is not what we mean and I ran into several students who made this incorrect assumption this year.

We might then want to add a sentence defining what a statistical observation is, and what a statistical variable is.

Author: I said, "in statistics, we define..." instead of using the terms "statistical observation" -- I think it gets the same point across, but uses definitions more consistent with other resources

    - `group_by`
    - `map`

## Data frames and Vectors

We now know how to load data into R from various file formats.
Given that most of the tools we have use to do this represent the data as a 
data frame in R, we will spend some time learning more about data frames
to deepen our understanding of them. This will be useful prerequisite knowledge
to use and manipulate these objects in our data analysis.

### What is a data frame?

To define a **data frame**, first, let's explain a few commonly used terms in statistics:

- **observation** -  all of the quantities or a qualities we collect from a given entity/object 
- **variable** - any characteristic, number, or quantity that can be measured or collected 
-  **value** - a single collected quantity or a quality from a given entity/object

From a data perspective, a data frame is a rectangle where the rows are the observations:

```{r 02-setup, include=FALSE}

> devtools::install_github("ttimbers/canlang")

Reviewer: We need to remove this. We should never install a package on someone else's computer in an Rmd/script. I have included the package in the Docker container.
```suggestion
```

```

From a computer programming perspective, in R, a data frame is a special subtype of a list object whose elements (columns) are *vectors*. For example, the data frame below has three vectors whose names are `state`, `year` and `population`.

```{r 02-vectors, echo = FALSE, message = FALSE, warning = FALSE, fig.cap = "Data frame with 3 vectors", fig.retina = 2, out.width = "650"}
knitr::include_graphics("img/vectors.jpeg")
```

### What is a vector?

In R, **vectors** are objects that can contain one or more elements. The vector elements are ordered, and they must all be of the same *data type*. R has several different basic data types, as shown in table \@ref(tab:datatype-table).

In the vector shown below, the elements are of numeric type:

```{r 02-vector, echo = FALSE, message = FALSE, warning = FALSE, fig.cap = "Example of a numeric type vector", fig.retina = 2, out.width = "600"}
knitr::include_graphics("img/vector.jpeg")
```

Table: (\#tab:datatype-table) Basic data types in R

| Data type | Description | Example |
|-------|------------------|-----------|
| character | Letters or numbers surrounded by quotes |  "1", "Hello world!" |

> | numeric | Whole numbers and numbers with decimal values |   1.23, 20 |  

Reviewer: Integer is numeric. Numeric is a higher umbrella that includes integer and double. We probably want to state that here. And we probably want to tell them that 99% of the time if they are working with numbers, they will be double. That is the default when you create a vector using `c` from numbers in R (even whole numbers), and when you read in whole numbers via `read_csv` (or I am at least 99% sure about that - please confirm).

Author: Okay I introduced the idea of factors here and then I mention that we will discuss them more in depth in Ch 4!

```{r}
year <- c(2015, 2013, 2011, 2016, 2018)
year
```

Table: (\#tab:datatype-table) Basic data types in R

| Data type | Description | Example |
|-------|------------------|-----------|
| character | Letters or numbers surrounded by quotes |  "1" , "Hello world!" |
|  double  | Numbers with decimals values         | 1.2333 | 
|  integer | Numbers that do not contain decimals | 1L, 20L (where "L" tells R to store as an integer) | 
| logical |  A value of true and false | `TRUE`, `FALSE` | 
| factor  | Used to represent data with a limited number of values | a `size` variable with levels "large", "medium" and "small" | 

>  "Numeric" is an umbrella term that includes integer and double data types.
> Most of the time when working with numbers in R they will be double types. For instance, a double data type is the default when you create a vector of numbers using `c()`, and when you read in whole numbers via `read_csv`.
> There are other basic data types in R, such as *raw* and *complex*, which we won't cover in this textbook. 
> We will go into more details about factors in chapter \@ref(viz).

### How are vectors different from a list?

> Lists are also objects in R that have multiple elements. Vectors and lists differ by the requirement of element type consistency. All elements 

Reviewer: OK, from Jenny: good for us to call these über-vectors, so let's do that!

> Lists are also objects in R that have multiple elements. Vectors and lists differ by the requirement of element type consistency. All elements 

Reviewer: Also, she has this great way of defining atomic vectors and I think we should do it how she does. As in, we actually call them atomic vectors when we introduce them, and define the as Jenny does (pasted below) and then tell them that we will call them vectors going forward. 

From Jenny:

Since then (or maybe I’ve said/written it there too), I feel like I’ve gotten a good way to explain atomic vectors. We’re saying what the atoms of these things are, i.e. the individual units from which they are built. Atomic vectors are collections built up from the most fundamental data types R has.

Vectors, data frames and lists are basic types of *data structures* in R, which we summarize in table \@ref(tab:datastructure-table).

Table: (\#tab:datastructure-table) Basic data structures in R

| Data Structure | Description |
|------|------------------|
| vector | A set of values of the *same data type* (e.g. all values are numeric). A vector can be used to represent a single variable  | 
| data frame | A set of *vectors* of the *same length*. A data frame can be used to represent a data set. | 
| list | A set of values, which can have different data types. Lists can be used to represent combinations of data values.| 

> There are other data structures, such as *matrices*, which will not be covered in this book. 

## Tidy Data

There are many ways a spreadsheet-like data set can be organized. This chapter will focus on the *tidy data* format of organization and how to make your raw (and likely messy) data tidy. We want to tidy our data because various tools we would like to use in R are designed to work most effectively (and efficiently) with tidy data. 

### What is tidy data?

> 

Author: I moved this set of definitions before we start using these terms and I added that these terms are terms in statistics (see my note above!)

### Why is tidy data important in R?

> First, one of R's most popular plotting toolsets, the `ggplot2` package (which is one of the packages that the `tidyverse` package loads), expects the data to be in a tidy format. Second, most statistical analysis functions also expect data in a tidy format. Given that both of these tasks are central in almost all data analysis projects, it is well worth spending the time to get your data into a tidy format upfront. Luckily there are many well-designed `tidyverse` data cleaning/wrangling tools to help you easily tidy your data. Let's explore them now!

Reviewer: This seems redundant to the text in 3.4. Should we merge this with that text and remove this?

Or maybe we start off 3.4 asking a question - such as, is there a best way to organize your data for all/most analyses? And then say, yes indeed there does seem to be a standard format that is almost universally useful, it is called the tidy data format. We will first explain what it is, and then why it's so effective.

Then here, we have all the rationale for why. 

What do you think? The reason I am suggesting this, is that it's hard to fully justify why we are telling them to use something they have not yet even seen. If you prefer moving this all to 3.4 though, I am can be happy with that too. The biggest issue is that we need to remove this redundancy on the why.

Author: Good point! I removed the redundancy in section 3.4 and moved the "why" up before the "what". Not sure if it'd be better to do it the other way around? (what and then why?)

```

> What is wrong with our untidy format above? From a data analysis perspective, this format is not ideal because, in this format, the outcome of the variable *region* (Toronto, Montreal, Vancouver, Calgary and Edmonton) is stored as column names. Thus it is not easily accessible for the data analysis functions we will want to apply to our data set. Additionally, the values of the *mother tongue* variable are spread across multiple columns, which will prevent us from doing any desired visualization or statistical tasks until we combine them into one column. For instance, suppose we want to know which languages had the highest number of Canadians reporting it as their mother tongue among all five regions? This question would be tough to answer with the data in its current format. It would be much easier to answer if we tidy our data first. 

Reviewer: I think a graphic of the wide data, that is not tidy, and then the tidied data would be nice here, before we dig into the code to tidy it would help learners see what they need to do, before they have to rationalize what the code does. I think this is one of the more complicated bits of wrangling in the book, so extra graphics might be helpful.

I wonder if a code graphic here also would be nice? Like the super awesome one you make for ggplot?

Author: Good point! added 4 new graphics (for each of the pivot_* sections: added a general example that is simpler and then added another graphic which summarized how we reshaped the language data specifically). I really struggled to try to make them clean and as clear as possible so comments are welcome!

them below!

### Going from wide to long (or tidy!) using `pivot_longer`
One common step to get data into a tidy format is to combine columns stored in
separate columns but are really part of the same variable. Data is often stored
in a wider, not tidy, format because this format is usually more intuitive for
human readability and understanding, and humans create data sets.

For example, in Figure \@ref(fig:02-wide-to-long), the table on the left is an
untidy format because the year values (2011, 2016) are listed as the column headers. 
One problem with using data in this format is that we don't know what the values
under each year represent in the table. Also, we can't easily access the year
values, so if we wanted to find the maximum year, for example, it's hard to do 
when the values are not in their own column. We can reshape this data set to a long format by creating a column called "year" and a column called "population," which is the table on the right.

```{r 02-wide-to-long, echo = FALSE, message = FALSE, warning = FALSE, fig.cap = "Going from wide to long data", fig.retina = 2, out.width = "1150"}

> knitr::include_graphics("img/wide_to_long.jpeg")

Reviewer: This figure is moving well in the right direction! Nice work!!! I think we can improve it by changing it slightly so we don't have the lines draw over the the tables, something like this:

![PXL_20210606_061454499](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6865016/120914619-4610f100-c654-11eb-9cee-4b020aec9b82.jpg)

> > *to read clearly. When doing this, it is important to end the line with a comma `,` so that R*

Reviewer: We should state the number of recommended characters here (80 I think?) and there is an extra `*` at the end of this line I think.

> *knows the function should continue to the next line.*

> The data above is now tidy because all three criteria for tidy data have now been met:

Reviewer: In the "3.4.4 Going from long to wide using pivot_wider" section below, I think the second sentence needs to be a general example of what an observation split across two rows might look like.

Author: Made an example with a graphic

```

What is wrong with our untidy format above? From a data analysis perspective, this format is not ideal because, in this format, the outcome of the variable *region* (Toronto, Montréal, Vancouver, Calgary and Edmonton) is stored as column names. Thus it is not easily accessible for the data analysis functions we will want to apply to our data set. Additionally, the values of the *mother tongue* variable are spread across multiple columns, which will prevent us from doing any desired visualization or statistical tasks until we combine them into one column. For instance, suppose we want to know the languages with the highest number of Canadians reporting it as their mother tongue among all five regions. This question would be tough to answer with the data in its current format. It would be much easier to answer if we tidy our data first. 

To accomplish this data transformation, we will use the `tidyverse` function `pivot_longer`. Figure \@ref(fig:img-pivot-longer) details what we need to specify to use `pivot_longer`.

```{r img-pivot-longer, echo = FALSE, message = FALSE, warning = FALSE, fig.cap = "Syntax for the pivot_longer function", out.width="1100", fig.retina = 2}

> knitr::include_graphics("img/pivot_longer.jpeg")

Reviewer: This figure is moving well in the right direction! Nice work!!! I think we can improve it by changing it slightly so we don't have the lines draw over the the tables, something like this:

![PXL_20210606_061454499](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6865016/120914619-4610f100-c654-11eb-9cee-4b020aec9b82.jpg)

lang_long
```

> What is wrong with this format above? In this example, each observation should be a language in a region. However, in the messy data set above, each observation is split across multiple two rows. One where the count for `most_at_home` is recorded and the other where the count for `most_at_work` is recorded. Suppose we wanted to visualize the relationship between the number of Canadians reporting their primary language at home and work. It would be difficult to do that with the data in its current format. To fix this, we will use `pivot_wider`, and we need to specify the:

Reviewer: Again, I wonder if a graphic of the messy and tidy data sets with annotation would be helpful? And a code graphic?

lang_no_delimiter
```

> You might notice in the table above the word `<chr>` appears beneath each of the column names. The word under the column name indicates the data type of each column. Here all of our variables are "character" data types. Recall, a character data type is a letter or a number surrounded by quotes. In the previous example, `most_at_home` and `most_at_work`  were `<dbl>` (double) (you can verify this by looking at the tables in the previous sections), which is a numeric data type. This change is due to the delimiter "/" when we read in this messy data set. R read the columns in as character types, and it stayed that way after we separated the columns. 

Reviewer: I think the bit on `mutate` needs its own header. Otherwise it will be hard to find when learners want to refer back to this.

Also, should we demonstrate some math with mutate? Or at least creating a new column? For example ratio of `most_at_work`/`most_at_home`?

Is there only one shape for tidy data for a given data set? Not necessarily! It depends on the statistical question you are asking and what the variables are for that question. For tidy data, each variable should be its own column. So, just as it's essential to match your statistical question with the appropriate data analysis tool (classification, clustering, hypothesis testing, etc.). It's important to match your statistical question with the appropriate variables and ensure they are represented as individual columns to make the data tidy.

> ## More ways to create subsets of data frames with `select` & `filter`

Reviewer: I think we need a snappier header - it is difficult to read the whole header in the book table of contents on the left-handside when viewed as an html book.

```{r}
mandarin <- filter(can_lang, language == "Mandarin")
mandarin
```

```{r changing_the_units, include = FALSE}
mandarin_mother_tongue <- mandarin %>%
  pull(mother_tongue)
census_popn <- 35151728
```
### Using `filter` to extract rows with values above or below a threshold

If we are interested in finding the languages with higher numbers of people who speak it as their mother tongue than Mandarin---which is  `r format(mandarin_mother_tongue, scientific = FALSE, big.mark = ",")` people ---then we can create a filter to obtain rows where the value of `mother_tongue` is greater than `r format(mandarin_mother_tongue, scientific = FALSE, big.mark = ",")`. In this case, we see that `filter` returns a data frame with two rows; this indicates that two languages are spoken more often as their mother tongue compared to Mandarin.

```{r}
spoke_often_at_home <- filter(can_lang, mother_tongue > 592040)
spoke_often_at_home
```

> ### Using `mutate` to add columns or overwrite existing columns

Reviewer: Oh, now I see there is a section on `mutate`... Can we somehow combine these? Maybe move this up earlier? We could still do the context thing? Perhaps for the 5 cities for the bar charts? To do that we would need `c()` I think to create a vector of the population of the 5 cities... But I think we should introduce `c()` somewhere anyways? Maybe in the vector section? It is so useful - more so than `data.frame()` or `tibble()`.

We can use the `mutate` function in R to calculate the proportion for all of the languages in the 2016 Canadian census data set. `mutate` is useful for creating new columns in a data frame or transforming existing columns. Its general syntax is: 

```{r img-mutate, echo = FALSE, message = FALSE, warning = FALSE, fig.cap = "Syntax for the mutate function", out.width="1100", fig.retina = 2}
knitr::include_graphics("img/mutate_function.jpeg")
```

Below we use `mutate` to calculate the proportion of people reporting a given language as their mother tongue for all the languages in the `can_lang` data set as shown in figure \@ref(fig:img-mutate):
```{r}
mutated_can_lang <- mutate(can_lang, mother_tongue_proportion = mother_tongue / 35151728)
```

Here we used a new data frame name (`mutated_can_lang`) and column name (`mother_tongue_proportion`) to create a new data frame and a new column. But we could have used the existing data frame name (`can_lang`) and column name (`mother_tongue`), which would have written over our original data frame and column.

> ## Combining functions using the pipe operator, `%>%`:

Reviewer: We need to move this to the new `|>` pipe operator, but still introduce `%>%` from `magrittr`. Linking to the issue where we discussed how to do this: https://github.com/UBC-DSCI/introduction-to-datascience/issues/153

lang_no_delimiter
```

Is this data set now tidy? If we recall the three criteria for tidy data:

- each row is a single observation,
- each column is a single variable, and
- each value is a single cell.

We can see that this data now satisfies all three criteria, making it easier to analyze. However, we aren't done yet! We have a few more tasks we need to do to get this data in a more usable format, which we will see in the sections below. 

> ### Using `select` to extract a range of columns

Reviewer: Using three `#`'s puts this (and the `filter` and `mutate` headers) under the umbrella of tidy data, which I don't think they belong... Jenny Bryan would call these things single table manipulation functions/verbs. Let's either use something like that or put them under their own sections with two `#`'s.

```{r}
official_langs <- filter(lang_no_delimiter, category == "Official languages")
official_langs
```

### Using `filter` to extract rows with values above or below a threshold

```{r changing_the_units, include = FALSE}
census_popn <- 35151728
most_french <- 2669195
```

We see that `r format(most_french, scientific = FALSE, big.mark = ",")` people reported speaking French in Montréal as their primary language at home. If we are interested in finding the languages in regions with higher numbers of people who speak it as their primary language at home than French in Montréal then we can create a filter to obtain rows where the value of `most_at_home` is greater than `r format(most_french, scientific = FALSE, big.mark = ",")`.

```{r}
filter(official_langs, most_at_home > 2669195)
```

When we look at the table we got from `filter` above, it isn't quite doing what we'd expect. We see numbers in the table in the `most_at_home` column that are less than `r format(most_french, scientific = FALSE, big.mark = ",")`. What's going on here? 

> 

Author: We use `|` in chapter 4 I believe and introduce it there. I could move the explanation of it from there to here, what do you think?

`mutate`'s general syntax is detailed in Figure \@ref(fig:img-mutate). 

```{r img-mutate, echo = FALSE, message = FALSE, warning = FALSE, fig.cap = "Syntax for the mutate function", out.width="1100", fig.retina = 2}
knitr::include_graphics("img/mutate_function.jpeg")
```

Below we use `mutate` to convert the columns `most_at_home` and `most_at_home`
to numeric data types in the `official_langs` data set as described in figure 
\@ref(fig:img-mutate):

```{r}
official_langs <- mutate(official_langs,
  most_at_home = as.numeric(most_at_home),
  most_at_work = as.numeric(most_at_work)
)
official_langs
```
Now we see `<dbl>` appears under our columns, `most_at_home` and `most_at_work`, indicating they are double data types (which is one of the sub-types of numeric)!

Now when we filter we get what we expect: 
```{r}
filter(official_langs, most_at_home > 2669195)
```

In this case, we see that `filter` returns a data frame with only one row; this indicates that only English in Toronto is reported by more people as their primary language at home than French in Montréal.

> 

Reviewer: Can we add another plain vanilla `mutate` example, where we do some math? Or change the value of the column. I think changing types is one of the more less common examples of mutate... More often I am changing the scale of a variable, or combing columns in some way, etc.

We can see the populations of the five cities by filtering the data
using the `%in%` operator. The `%in%` operator is used to see if an element 
belongs to a vector. Here we are filtering if any of the five cities 
("Toronto", "Montréal", "Vancouver", "Calgary", "Edmonton") match the rows in the `region`
column.
```{r}
filter(region_data, region %in% c("Toronto", "Montréal", "Vancouver", "Calgary", "Edmonton")) 

> ```

Reviewer: I feel like this should come in the `filter` section ... Especially when we want to reference backwards...

Reviewer: Also, we need to teach `c()` somewhere... In the vector section above?

Author: Yup! I already added an explanation of `c()` at the beginning of the chapter when we talk about vectors -- is that fine or did you want me to expand on it more or move it? 

Good point about %in% -- will add to this section

> **What's the difference between `==` and `%in%`?**
> Let's suppose we have two vectors, `vector1` and `vector2`. If you type 
> `vector1 == vector2` into R it
will compare the vectors element by element. R checks if the first element of 
`vector1` equals the first element of `vector2`, the second element of `vector1`
equals the second element of `vector2` etc. 
> On the other hand, `vector1 %in% vector2`
compares the first element of `vector1` to all the elements in `vector2`. 
Then the second element of `vector1` is then compared to all the elements in `vector2` etc. Notice the difference between `==` and `%in%` in the example below. 
 
```{r}
c("Vancouver", "Toronto") == c("Toronto", "Vancouver")
c("Vancouver", "Toronto") %in% c("Toronto", "Vancouver")
```

> ```{r, include = F}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```{r, include = FALSE}
```

rep_popn <- rep(city_popn, 2)
```

We can create a vector of the city populations. 
Then we use `mutate` to calculate
the proportion of people reporting a given language as their primary language at home for all the languages in the `official_langs` data set by dividing the column by our vector of city populations. We give the mutated column a new name `most_at_home_proportion`, which will create a new column in our data set. 
```{r}
city_populations <- c(5928040, 4098927, 2463431, 1392609, 1321426)

official_langs <- mutate(official_langs,
                           most_at_home_proportion = most_at_home / city_populations)

official_langs
```

> Notice that we divided a vector with 10 elements (`most_at_home`) by a vector with 
only 5 elements (`city_populations`). What gives? Arithmetic operations of vectors are performed *memberwise* meaning the first element of `most_at_home` will be divided by the first element 
of `city_populations`, the second element of `most_at_home` will be divided by the second element of `city_populations` and so on. When two vectors have different lengths, the 
shorter one will be recycled to match the longer one. Here the elements of

> `city_populations` will be repeated once to match the length of `most_at_home`.

Reviewer: I am quite concerned about teaching vector recycling... I think it might be good to teach that R does this, R doing this makes sense when vectors are of length 1, but can easily become an error-prone feature, when vectors are longer than length 1. 

In my own data wrangling, I would probably do some sort of `case_when` or `join`, but that too advanced for here... 

Actually, `case_when` might be good - as it goes inside `mutate`... but if we do this, we should teach a more vanilla `mutate` first...

Author: Yes, that is a very good point! I was trying to pick the "easiest" thing to do that wouldn't involve explaining a lot of new functions, but you're right that we probably don't want to show students this and then they will do it and its not best practice. So I left it in so we have a more vanilla mutate example, but added "this is actually a bad way to do it" . Then I show the better method with `case_when` and then at the end say there are multiple ways to accomplish the same thing!

### Creating a visualization with tidy data

Now that we have cleaned and wrangled our data, we can visualize how many people speak each of Canada's two 
official languages (English and French) as their primary language at home in 
these 5 regions. We can use
`ggplot` to create our data visualization. Here we create a bar chart to 
represent the proportions for each region, and colour the proportions by language. 

```{r 02-plot}
ggplot(official_langs, 
       aes(x = most_at_home_proportion, 
           y = region,
           fill = language)) +
  geom_bar(stat = "identity") +
  xlab("Proportion of residents reporting their primary language at home") + 
  ylab("Region")
```

> Don't worry too much about the code to make this plot, we will talk more in detail about visualizations in chapter \@ref(viz).

From this visualization, we can see that in Calgary, Edmonton, Toronto and Vancouver, English was reported as the most common primary language used at home compared to French. However, in Montréal, French was reported as the most common primary language used at home over English. 

### Notes on defining tidy data

> Is there only one shape for tidy data for a given data set? Not necessarily! It depends on the statistical question you are asking and what the variables are for that question. For tidy data, each variable should be its own column. So, just as it's essential to match your statistical question with the appropriate data analysis tool (classification, clustering, hypothesis testing, etc.). It's important to match your statistical question with the appropriate variables and ensure they are represented as individual columns to make the data tidy.

Reviewer: This should be in the tidy data section (before we start working with `select`.

> ## Combining functions using the pipe operator, `|>`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Combining functions using the pipe operator, `|>`
```

One way of doing is to just write multiple lines of code, storing temporary objects as you go:

> ```{r eval = F}

Reviewer: Please change all of the `F`'s to `FALSE`. If you don't do this, then you can do crazy things like `F <- TRUE` and then `F` will hold `TRUE` not `FALSE` in those code chunks.
```suggestion
```{r eval = FALSE}
```

Another option for doing this would be to *compose* the functions:

```{r eval = F}
output <- select(filter(mutate(data, new_col = old_col * 2), other_col > 5), new_col)
```

Code like this can also be difficult to understand. Functions compose (reading from left to right) in the *opposite order* in which
they are computed by R (above, `mutate` happens first, then `filter`, then `select`). It is also just a really long line of code
to read in one go. 

> The *pipe operator* `|>` solves this problem, resulting in cleaner and easier-to-follow code. The below accomplishes the same thing as the previous two code blocks:

Reviewer: We could write "built-in" instead of base R? Not sure which is more understandable to new learners?
```suggestion
The base R *pipe operator* `|>` solves this problem, resulting in cleaner and easier-to-follow code. The below accomplishes the same thing as the previous two code blocks:
```

```{r eval = F}
output <- data |> 
            mutate(new_col = old_col * 2) |>
            filter(other_col > 5) |>
            select(new_col)
```

> Note `%>%` is the previous version of the pipe operator so you may see it used 
in some textbooks or other sources. There are some drawbacks to using the `%>%` 

> pipe operator, thus, in this textbook we will be using the new pipe operator syntax `|>`. 

Reviewer: We should expand this a bit. We should add that `%>%` is not built in to R, and needs to be loaded via an external R package. Also that `|>` was inspired by `%>%` (interesting history). And note any key differences that might be of interest to our learners. If the differences seem too complex, say this is so and point them to where they can learn more. Wonder if we want to demonstrate one use of it, showing they do the same thing?
